+++
title = "We have made a deal"
description = "Have you ever heard of PoW? Are you curious about PoS, PoA, or DPoS? In this post you will learn the concepts about distributed system and take a glance at the most mysterious part of blockchain."
date=2018-09-06
category = "Posts"
tags = ["blockchain", "consensus"]

[extra]
author="Wayne Song"
+++

## Abstract

Have you ever heard of PoW? Are you curious about PoS, PoA, or DPoS? In this post you will learn the concepts about distributed system and take a glance at the most mysterious part of blockchain.

## Liveness & Safety
The design of an asynchronous distributed system is to balance liveness and safety. Liveness is a guarantee that something good will eventually happen. And safety is a guarantee that something bad will never happen. I’ll explain these two concepts by example. Suppose you have spent $100 from your credit card to buy some USDT tokens. We know that bank's backend services are built on top of tons of distinct servers, which make up an asynchronous distributed system together. When you check your account at different locations, you would feel confused if you got different results. You contact their customer service to ask why and are told that you should wait patiently until the whole system is consistent. This is incredible! But this is the truth;)[^sync]


## FLP Impossibility
FLP Impossibility is named after Fischer, Lynch, and Paterson, who published the paper “Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process” in 1985. The theorem stats that it’s impossible to simultaneously satisfy liveness and safety in an asynchronous fault tolerant system. According to the theorem, the reply from the customer service we mentioned before implies that they favor liveness over safety, which is reasonable (but not acceptable). Note that the fault tolerant system here means messages can be delayed but not dropped.

## CAP Theorem
Another related theorem is the CAP Theorem developed by Eric Brewer in 2000. First, let’s see what C A P represents for respectively.

* Consistency: Every read receives the most recent write or an error
* Availability: Every request receives a (non-error) response – without guarantee that it contains the most recent write
* Partition tolerance: The system continues to operate despite an arbitrary number of messages being dropped (or delayed) by the network between nodes

The theorem states that it is impossible for an asynchronous distributed system to simultaneously provide more than two out of the above three guarantees. So in the presence of a network partition, we have to carefully choose between consistency and availability. FLP Impossibility seems like the superset of CAP Theorem, since the faulty described in FLP is weaker than in CAP. 

CAP Theorem is a guide line for design or select the proper architecture for your distributed system. I will explain this in detail in later posts;)

There are two kinds of fault tolerance: crash fault tolerance (CFT) and byzantine fault tolerance (BFT). Paxos and Raft are two widely used CFT algorithms. Safety is guaranteed by them while liveness is not. Things become more complicate in the situation of BFT. I’ll introduce you the replicated state machine first.

## Replicated State Machine

The most common paradigm for studying and implementing distributed consensus is that of the Replicated State Machine. It meets the following conditions.
* The input of the machine is called transaction.
* The result of processing the transaction must be success, or it has to be reverted to the state before processing. There can’t be any other intermediate state.
* If the same initial state and set of inputs are provided, all the instances must reach the same final state.
* This set of inputs is called transaction log, and it must keep the same order among the instances.

Note that the data replicated among nodes is transaction log, not the snapshot of the machine. 

## BFT Protocols
PoW and some other consensus protocols/algorithms are developed to keep blockchain consistent in a BFT environment. The principle of PoW is to guarantee the liveness during replicating transaction logs while sacrificing the safety. By adding an external restriction, particular patterns of hash values, it can rely on the computational complexity to probabilistically ensure the safety. Bitcoin and Ethereum are both using PoW as their consensus protocol in their main net.[^bft]


## Conclusion
To design a reliable asynchronous distributed system is not an easy work. Blockchain is a great innovation in the area of distributed computation. I’ll write something about Tendermint later. Let’s go;)

## Disclaimer
As you see, I’m not a native English speaker. Feel free to point out any typo or error in grammar. Thanks;)

---
[^sync]: Don’t be nervous;) The settlement system in financial area is designed to be synchronous. All transactions are processed by the central bank of its country or some international organizations such as PayPal. This is the major difference with cryptocurrencies which is a totally asynchronous system.

[^bft]: Note that BFT here is relative to CFT. However, when we say Tendermint is a BFT-based consensus algorithm while PoW is not, we mean that the agreement of Tendermint is done through a multi-round voting instead of choosing the longest chain like PoW does.
